---
author: [Alessandro Cipriani, Maurizio Giri]
date: 2020-05-01
description: Additive And Vector Synthesis
seo-description: Additive and vector synthesis notes.
title: Chapter 2T - ADDITIVE AND VECTOR SYNTHESIS
---

Any sound is a set of complex oscillations.

Sine waves are the basic building blocks with which it is possible to construct all other waveforms. They are self-describing and they contain only themselves as components.

The set of frequencies, amplitudes, and phases that completely define a given sound is called its __sound spectrum__.

__Waveform__ is the graphical representation of amplitude as a function of time also known as time domain.

A __sound spectrum__ is a graph which the amplitude of the components is shown as a function of frequency also known as frequency domain.

In order to see the evolution of components over time, we can use a graph called a __sonogram__ or __spectrogram__.

__Additive synthesis__ in theory enables us to create any waveform at all by building up a sum of sine waves.

Whenever the amplitudes of A and B are both positive or both negative, the absolute value of the amplitude of C will be larger than that of either of the component, resulting in __constructive interference__.

Whenever the amplitudes of A and B differ in their signs, one being positive and the other negative, the absolute value of their sum C will be less than either one or both components, resulting in __destructive interference__.

A __pure sound__ has a sine waveform.

The lowest component frequency in a complex sound is called the __fundamental__, and the other components are called __harmonics__.


The components of a sound are integer multiples of the fundamental, the sound is called a __harmonic sound__.

If the pure sounds composing a complex sound are not integer multiples of the lowest frequency component, we have __non-harmonic components__ or __partials__.

An easy way to obtain a polarity-reversed waveform consists of multiplying every sample value by -1.

The line traced over the harmonic or non-harmonic spectrum is called the __spectral envelope__: it is a curve that connects the tops of the bars that represent the amplitude of the harmonics.

Sounds can contain both harmonic and non-harmonic components.

If two waves have the same frequency, but not necessarily the same amplitude, and if their positive and negative peaks coincide, we say that they are __in phase__.

When two interfering sounds create beats or the sensation of roughness rather than two distinct sounds, we say that the respective frequencies lie within a __critical band__ delineates boundaries within which our ears cannot separate individual sounds; instead, we resolve the complexity of such a signal with a sensation of roughness or by hearing beats.

Crossfading between wavetables is a technique called wavetable crossfading, vector synthesis, and linear algorithmic synthesis.

A sound effect known as __infinite glissando__ or __Shepard tone__ can be generated by using vector synthesis.
